\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename EIGHTBOL.info
@settitle EIGHTBOL Compiler Manual
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en
@c %**end of header

@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 2026 Interworldly Adventuring, LLC.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the MIT License, which can be found at
@url{https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT}.
@end copying

@titlepage
@title EIGHTBOL Compiler Manual
@subtitle An EIGHTBOL for 8-bit and 16-bit Microprocessors
@subtitle Edition 0.1, for EIGHTBOL version 0.1
@author Bruce-Robert Pocock

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top EIGHTBOL Compiler Manual

This  manual documents  EIGHTBOL, a  EIGHTBOL compiler  that generates
assembly code  for multiple  8-bit and 16-bit  microprocessors including
the 6502, Z80, cp1610, and m68k.

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction::                What is EIGHTBOL?
* Installation::                Getting EIGHTBOL up and running
* Quick Start::                 Your first EIGHTBOL program
* Language Reference::          EIGHTBOL features supported
* CPU Backends::                Target processor specifics
* Examples::                    Complete example programs
* Troubleshooting::             Common issues and solutions
* Index::                       Complete index
@end menu

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

@cindex introduction
@cindex EIGHTBOL compiler
@cindex 8-bit programming
@cindex retro computing

Welcome to EIGHTBOL, your friendly guide to programming classic video game
consoles and computers! If you've ever wanted to create your own games for
systems like the Atari 7800, Nintendo Entertainment System, or even the
Intellivision, you're in the right place.

@section What is Programming?

Before we dive into EIGHTBOL, let's take a moment to understand
what programming really is. Imagine you're giving instructions to a very
patient but not very bright friend. You need to break down every single
step of what you want them to do.

For example, if you want your friend to make a peanut butter sandwich:

@enumerate
@item Go to the kitchen
@item Open the bread bag
@item Take out 2 slices of bread
@item Put them on a plate
@item Open the peanut butter jar
@item Get a knife
@item Scoop peanut butter onto one slice
@item Spread it evenly
@item Put the knife down
@item Put the other slice on top
@item Give me the sandwich
@end enumerate

Programming is  exactly like  this! You write  step-by-step instructions
that  tell  a computer  exactly  what  to  do.  The difference  is  that
computers are incredibly fast and never get bored or distracted.

@section Meet EIGHTBOL

EIGHTBOL is based on COBOL (COmmon  Business Oriented Language)  was created in 1959  to help
businesses process  data and  generate reports. Unlike  many programming
languages  that use  cryptic symbols,  EIGHTBOL was  designed to  read like
English sentences.

Here's what a simple EIGHTBOL instruction looks like:

@example
ADD 1 TO Counter.
@end example

See how it reads almost like a sentence? That's the beauty of EIGHTBOL!

@section What is EIGHTBOL?

EIGHTBOL is  an EIGHTBOL variant designed for creating  games on
classic 8-bit  and 16-bit computers.  It takes EIGHTBOL programs  you write
and  converts  them  into  the low-level  instructions  that  these  old
computers understand.

Think  of EIGHTBOL  as  a translator  between  human-friendly EIGHTBOL  and
machine-friendly assembly language.

@section Why Learn EIGHTBOL?

Creating games  for classic systems teaches  you fundamental programming
concepts that apply to all programming:

@itemize
@item @strong{Problem Solving}: Breaking complex problems into small steps
@item @strong{Logic}: Making decisions and controlling program flow
@item @strong{Data Management}: Organizing and manipulating information
@item @strong{Performance}: Writing efficient code for limited hardware
@end itemize

Plus, you'll have the satisfaction of creating games that run on real
vintage hardware!

@section Your First Mental Model

Imagine your program as a recipe book. Each recipe (procedure) contains
step-by-step instructions. Your data is like the ingredients stored in
the pantry (memory).

When you run a program, it's like following a recipe: you get ingredients
from storage, follow the steps, and create something new.

@section What You'll Learn

By the end of this manual, you'll be able to:

@itemize
@item Write complete EIGHTBOL programs
@item Create variables to store data
@item Use arithmetic and logic operations
@item Control program flow with conditions and loops
@item Organize code into reusable procedures
@item Debug and fix common programming errors
@item Compile programs for multiple classic game systems
@end itemize

@section Target Platforms

EIGHTBOL generates assembly code for these CPU architectures:

@table @asis
@item 6502
MOS Technology 6502 8-bit processor
@item Z80
Zilog Z80 8-bit processor
@item CP1610
General Instrument CP1610 16-bit processor
@item M68K
Motorola 68000 series 16-bit/32-bit processors
@end table

@section Ready to Start?

Programming can seem intimidating at first, but remember: every expert
programmer was once a beginner. We'll take it one small step at a time,
and you'll be surprised how quickly concepts start to click.

Let's begin your programming journey!

@node Installation
@chapter Installation

@cindex installation
@cindex setup
@cindex requirements

@section System Requirements

EIGHTBOL requires:
@itemize
@item Common Lisp implementation (SBCL recommended)
@item ASDF system definition facility
@item Texinfo (for documentation)
@end itemize

@section Loading EIGHTBOL

To use EIGHTBOL in your Lisp environment:

@example
(ql:quickload :eightbol)
@end example

Or manually:

@example
(asdf:load-system :eightbol)
@end example

@section Integration with Phantasia

EIGHTBOL is automatically available when using the Skyline Tool:

@example
(ql:quickload :skyline-tool)
@end example

@section Running Tests

To run the EIGHTBOL test suite:

@example
(asdf:test-system :eightbol)
@end example

Tests cover the lexer, parser, AST structure, unsupported-statement errors,
STRING BLT with reference modification, and all CPU backends.

@node Quick Start
@chapter Quick Start

@cindex quick start
@cindex hello world
@cindex first program

Congratulations! You're about to write your first computer program. We'll
start with something simple but complete. By the end of this chapter,
you'll have a working program that you can compile and run.

@section Understanding Program Structure

Before we write code, let's understand how EIGHTBOL programs are organized.
Think of an EIGHTBOL program like a recipe book with specific sections:

@table @asis
@item IDENTIFICATION DIVISION
The title page - tells us what this program is
@item ENVIRONMENT DIVISION
The kitchen setup - tells us what tools we need
@item DATA DIVISION
The ingredient list - defines our data storage
@item PROCEDURE DIVISION
The cooking instructions - the actual program logic
@end table

@section Your First Object: Score Counter

Let's create a simple object that manages a score counter. This will teach us
about classes, methods, and data management in EIGHTBOL.

Create a file called @file{ScoreCounter.cob} with this content:

@example
IDENTIFICATION DIVISION.
CLASS-ID. ScoreCounter.

OBJECT.
    DATA DIVISION.
        COPY WorkingStorage.

    PROCEDURE DIVISION.

        METHOD-ID. "Initialize".
            PROCEDURE DIVISION.
            MOVE 0 TO Current-Score.
            EXIT METHOD.
        END METHOD "Initialize".

        METHOD-ID. "Increment".
            PROCEDURE DIVISION.
            IF Current-Score < Max-Score THEN
                ADD 1 TO Current-Score
            END-IF.
            EXIT METHOD.
        END METHOD "Increment".

        METHOD-ID. "GetScore".
            PROCEDURE DIVISION.
            GOBACK GIVING Current-Score.
        END METHOD "GetScore".

        METHOD-ID. "IsComplete".
            PROCEDURE DIVISION.
            IF Current-Score >= Max-Score THEN
                GOBACK GIVING 1
            ELSE
                GOBACK GIVING 0
            END-IF.
        END METHOD "IsComplete".
END OBJECT.

END CLASS ScoreCounter.
@end example

Let's break this down line by line:

@table @code
@item IDENTIFICATION DIVISION.
This marks the beginning of our object's identity section
@item CLASS-ID. ScoreCounter.
We name our class "ScoreCounter"
@item OBJECT.
This defines the object structure
@item DATA DIVISION.
Here we define our object's data storage
@item COPY WorkingStorage.
Includes system-provided data definitions
@item METHOD-ID. "Initialize".
A method to set up the object
@item MOVE 0 TO Current-Score.
Reset the score to 0
@item METHOD-ID. "Increment".
A method to increase the score
@item IF Current-Score < Max-Score THEN
Only increment if we haven't reached the maximum
@item METHOD-ID. "GetScore".
A method to retrieve the current score
@item GOBACK GIVING Current-Score.
Return the current score value
@end table

@section Compiling Your Program

Now let's turn this EIGHTBOL program into assembly code that a computer can
understand.

In your Lisp environment, load EIGHTBOL and compile:

@example
;; Load EIGHTBOL
(asdf:load-system :eightbol)

;; Compile for the 6502 processor (Atari 7800/NES)
;; Include copybook directories for COPY statements
(eightbol:compile-file "counter.cob" :cpu 6502
                       :include '("Source/Generated" "Source/Classes"))
@end example

This creates a file called @file{counter.s} containing 6502 assembly code.

@section Running Your Program

The assembly code needs to be assembled into machine code and run on
the target platform. This usually involves:

@enumerate
@item Using an assembler (like 64tass for 6502)
@item Linking with system libraries
@item Running on an emulator or real hardware
@end enumerate

For learning purposes, you can examine the generated assembly code to
see how your EIGHTBOL translates to machine instructions.

@section Try This!

Modify the counter program to count down from 10 to 1 instead of up.
Hint: Use SUBTRACT instead of ADD, and change the UNTIL condition.

@section What You Learned

In this chapter, you learned:

@itemize
@item How EIGHTBOL programs are structured into divisions
@item How to declare variables with PIC clauses
@item How to use PERFORM for looping
@item How to display output
@item How to compile EIGHTBOL to assembly
@end itemize

Great job on your first program! In the next chapter, we'll dive deeper
into variables and data types.

@node Language Reference
@chapter Language Reference

@cindex language reference
@cindex syntax
@cindex EIGHTBOL features

Now that you understand the basics, let's explore EIGHTBOL's features in detail.
We'll build your understanding step by step, with examples you can try.

@section The Recipe Book: Program Structure

Imagine an EIGHTBOL program as a cookbook. Just like a cookbook has sections
for ingredients and instructions, an EIGHTBOL program has divisions that
organize different types of information.

@example
IDENTIFICATION DIVISION.      @c What is this object?
CLASS-ID. Player.

OBJECT.
    DATA DIVISION.            @c What data do we need?
        COPY PlayerData.

    PROCEDURE DIVISION.       @c What methods do we have?

        METHOD-ID. "AddPoints".
            PROCEDURE DIVISION USING Points-To-Add.
            ADD Points-To-Add TO Player-Score.
            EXIT METHOD.
        END METHOD "AddPoints".

        METHOD-ID. "GetScore".
            PROCEDURE DIVISION.
            GOBACK GIVING Player-Score.
        END METHOD "GetScore".
END OBJECT.

END CLASS Player.
@end example

Each division has a specific purpose:

@table @asis
@item IDENTIFICATION DIVISION
Like the title page - tells us what this class is
@item CLASS-ID
Names our class (like a blueprint for objects)
@item OBJECT
Defines the object structure and behavior
@item DATA DIVISION
Like the ingredient list - defines our object's data storage
@item PROCEDURE DIVISION
Like the methods - defines our object's behavior
@end itemize

@section Naming Your Class

Every EIGHTBOL class needs an identity. This is like giving your blueprint
a name and author.

@example
IDENTIFICATION DIVISION.
CLASS-ID. Space-Invaders-Clone.
AUTHOR. Your Name Here.
DATE-WRITTEN. 2026.
@end example

The @code{CLASS-ID} is required and must be unique. Think of it as
your class's name.

EIGHTBOL supports object-oriented programming with:

@table @code
@item CLASS-ID. name.
Defines a class (like a blueprint for objects)
@item METHOD-ID. name.
Defines a method within a class
@item OBJECT.
Contains the data and methods for the class
@end table

@example
IDENTIFICATION DIVISION.
CLASS-ID. Player-Character.
AUTHOR. Game Developer.
DATE-WRITTEN. 2024.
@end example

@section Storing Information: Variables

Variables are like containers that hold data. In EIGHTBOL, we declare
variables in the DATA DIVISION, just like listing ingredients before
cooking.

@subsection Understanding PIC Clauses

PIC (Picture) clauses describe what kind of data a variable can hold.
Think of them as labels on storage containers.

@example
DATA DIVISION.
WORKING-STORAGE SECTION.
01 Player-Name PIC X(20).        @c Up to 20 letters
01 Player-Score PIC 9(5).        @c 5-digit number (0-99999)
01 Game-Over-Flag PIC X.         @c Single character: 'Y' or 'N'
01 Bonus-Multiplier PIC 9V9.     @c Decimal number: 1.5, 2.0, etc.
@end example

@table @code
@item PIC X
Single character (letter or symbol)
@item PIC X(n)
String of n characters
@item PIC 9
Single digit (0-9)
@item PIC 9(n)
n-digit number
@item PIC 9V9
Decimal number (like 1.5)
@end table

@strong{Important:} EIGHTBOL doesn't support string variables (PIC X).
Use byte arrays or numeric variables instead.

@subsection Try This: Variable Declaration

Create variables for a simple game character:

@example
DATA DIVISION.
COPY CharacterData.
@end example

What happens if you try to store "SuperLongCharacterName" in Character-Name?

@subsection Arrays: Storing Lists

Sometimes you need to store collections of data, like high scores or
inventory items.

@example
DATA DIVISION.
WORKING-STORAGE SECTION.
01 High-Scores PIC 9(5) OCCURS 10 TIMES.
01 Inventory PIC X(20) OCCURS 50 TIMES.

PROCEDURE DIVISION.
Store-High-Score.
    MOVE Player-Score TO High-Scores(1).
    GOBACK.
@end example

Access array elements with parentheses: @code{Array-Name(index)}

@strong{Note:} EIGHTBOL arrays are 1-based (start at 1, not 0 like some languages).

@section Making Your Program Do Things: Procedures

The PROCEDURE DIVISION is where the action happens - this is your
program's recipe steps. Here you write the instructions that tell
the computer what to do.

@subsection Basic Statements

EIGHTBOL statements read like English sentences. Here are the most common:

@table @code
@item MOVE source TO destination
Copy data from one place to another
@item ADD amount TO variable
Add numbers together
@item SUBTRACT amount FROM variable
Subtract numbers
@item COMPUTE result = expression
Perform calculations
@item STRING source DELIMITED BY SIZE INTO dest
Block transfer (BLT): copy bytes from source to dest. Supports reference
modification: @code{name(start:length)} for partial buffer copy.
@end table

@example
    METHOD-ID. "Copy".
        PROCEDURE DIVISION.
        STRING SrcBuf(1:64) DELIMITED BY SIZE INTO DstBuf(1:64).
        GOBACK.
    END METHOD "Copy".
@end example

@strong{Note:} STRING with character delimiter is not supported; use
@code{DELIMITED BY SIZE} for block transfer only.

@subsection Unsupported Statements (compile-time error)

The following COBOL statements are not implemented and signal a compile-time
error: DIVIDE, MULTIPLY, UNSTRING, INSPECT (all forms), GOTO/GO TO,
EVALUATE, and SET forms other than @code{SET identifier TO expression}.

@example
    METHOD-ID. "Initialize".
        PROCEDURE DIVISION.
        MOVE 100 TO Player-Health.
        MOVE "Ready Player One" TO Game-Status.
        EXIT METHOD.
    END METHOD "Initialize".
@end example

@subsection Including Code: COPY Statements

Sometimes you want to reuse the same data definitions across multiple
programs. COBOL's COPY statement lets you include copybook files:

@example
IDENTIFICATION DIVISION.
PROGRAM-ID. Game-Logic.

DATA DIVISION.
WORKING-STORAGE SECTION.
COPY Game-Constants.     @c Include constants
COPY Player-Data.        @c Include player definitions

PROCEDURE DIVISION.
    MOVE Max-Health TO Player-Health
    GOBACK.
@end example

Copybooks use the WORKING-STORAGE SECTION with EXTERNAL data items
and USAGE BINARY for proper byte alignment:

@example
WORKING-STORAGE SECTION.
01  WS-SHARED-DATA EXTERNAL.
    05  Decal-XH USAGE BINARY 1.
    05  Player-Score USAGE BINARY 2.
@end example

Copybooks are searched for in the directories specified by the
@code{:include} parameter when compiling:

@example
(eightbol:compile-file "game-logic.cob"
                       :include '("Source/Generated" "Source/Classes"))
@end example

@subsection Organizing Code: Procedures

Procedures are like sub-recipes. Break complex tasks into smaller,
manageable pieces.

@example
PROCEDURE DIVISION.

Main-Game-Loop.
    PERFORM Handle-Input
    PERFORM Update-Game-State
    PERFORM Render-Screen
    PERFORM Check-Game-Over
    GOBACK.

Handle-Input.
    IF Button-A-Pressed THEN
        PERFORM Player-Jump
    END-IF
    GOBACK.

Player-Jump.
    ADD Jump-Power TO Player-Velocity-Y
    GOBACK.
@end example

Each procedure ends with GOBACK, which returns to the caller.

@subsection Making Decisions: IF Statements

Programs need to make choices based on conditions.

@example
IF Health-Points < 20 THEN
    MOVE 1 TO Low-Health-Flag
END-IF.
@end example

EIGHTBOL's IF statements read like English. You can include ELSE for alternatives:

@example
IF Enemy-Strength > Player-Level THEN
    PERFORM Run-Away
ELSE
    PERFORM Attack-Enemy
END-IF.
@end example

@subsection Repeating Actions: Loops

Games often repeat actions, like updating all enemies.

@table @code
@item PERFORM procedure
Call a procedure once
@item PERFORM procedure UNTIL condition
Repeat until condition is true
@item PERFORM procedure VARYING var FROM start BY step UNTIL end
Count through a range
@end table

@example
PERFORM Update-All-Enemies.

PERFORM Process-Game-Turn UNTIL Game-Over = 1.

PERFORM Check-Enemy VARYING I FROM 1 BY 1 UNTIL I > Enemy-Count.
@end example

@subsection Multiple Choices: EVALUATE

When you have many options, EVALUATE is cleaner than nested IFs:

@example
EVALUATE Player-Choice
    WHEN 1
        PERFORM Start-New-Game
    WHEN 2
        PERFORM Load-Saved-Game
    WHEN 3
        PERFORM Show-Options
    WHEN OTHER
        MOVE 1 TO Invalid-Choice-Flag
END-EVALUATE.
@end example

@subsection Game Programming Extensions

EIGHTBOL includes special features for game development:

@table @code
@item property OF object
Access object properties (like Player.Health)
@item INVOKE object "method"
Call object methods
@item CALL subroutine IN BANK bank
Banked memory calls
@item LOG FAULT "code"
Log fault condition (uses LogFault)
@item BREAK FOR FAULT "code"
Break execution on fault (uses DebugBreak)
@end table

@example
INVOKE Player "TakeDamage" USING 25.

IF Health OF Player < 10 THEN
    LOG FAULT "LOWH"
END-IF.

BREAK FOR FAULT "CRIT" WHEN Health OF Player <= 0.
@end example

@section Expressions and Conditions

@cindex expressions
@cindex conditions
@cindex operators

EIGHTBOL expressions compare values and combine conditions.

@subsection Comparison Operators

EIGHTBOL uses words for comparisons, making them readable:

@table @code
@item A = B
A equals B
@item A <> B
A is not equal to B
@item A < B
A is less than B
@item A > B
A is greater than B
@item A <= B
A is less than or equal to B
@item A >= B
A is greater than or equal to B
@end table

@example
IF Player-Score >= High-Score THEN
    MOVE Player-Name TO Champion-Name
END-IF.
@end example

@subsection Logical Operators

Combine conditions with AND, OR, and NOT:

@table @code
@item AND
Both conditions must be true
@item OR
At least one condition must be true
@item NOT
Reverse the condition
@end table

@example
IF Health > 0 AND Mana > 10 THEN
    MOVE 1 TO Spell-Ready-Flag
END-IF.

IF NOT Game-Over THEN
    PERFORM Continue-Game
END-IF.
@end example

@subsection Complex Conditions

You can combine multiple conditions:

@example
IF Player-Level >= 5 AND Has-Magic-Sword = 'Y' OR Is-Cheat-Mode = 1 THEN
    PERFORM Unlock-Secret-Level
END-IF.
@end example

@strong{Remember:} AND is evaluated before OR. Use parentheses if needed.

@section Doing Math: Arithmetic

EIGHTBOL provides several ways to calculate:

@example
ADD 100 TO Player-Score.

SUBTRACT Damage FROM Health-Points.

MULTIPLY Attack-Power BY 2 GIVING Total-Damage.

COMPUTE Final-Score = Base-Score + (Bonus * Multiplier).
@end example

@subsection Arithmetic Operations

@table @asis
@item ADD source TO destination
Add to existing value
@item ADD source TO destination GIVING result
Add and store in new variable
@item SUBTRACT source FROM destination
Subtract from existing value
@item MULTIPLY source BY destination
Multiply values
@item DIVIDE source INTO destination
Divide values
@item COMPUTE result = expression
Complex calculations
@end table

@subsection Try This: Score Calculation

@example
COMPUTE Final-Score = Base-Score + (Time-Bonus * 10) - Penalties.

COMPUTE Average-Damage = Total-Damage / Hit-Count.
@end example

@section Built-in Functions

@cindex functions
@cindex RANDOM
@cindex WHEN-COMPILED

EIGHTBOL provides special functions for game programming:

@table @code
@item RANDOM
Generate a random number (0-255)
@item RANDOM(seed)
Generate seeded random number
@item WHEN-COMPILED
Get compilation timestamp
@end table

@example
COMPUTE Random-Direction = RANDOM.

IF RANDOM > 128 THEN
    PERFORM Move-Right
ELSE
    PERFORM Move-Left
END-IF.
@end example

@section Common Programming Patterns

Here are patterns you'll use frequently:

@subsection Game Loop Pattern

@example
PROCEDURE DIVISION.
Main-Loop.
    PERFORM Read-Input
    PERFORM Update-Objects
    PERFORM Draw-Screen
    IF NOT Game-Over THEN
        GO TO Main-Loop
    END-IF
    PERFORM Show-Game-Over
    GOBACK.
@end example

@subsection State Machine Pattern

@example
EVALUATE Game-State
    WHEN 1  @c Title Screen
        PERFORM Show-Title
    WHEN 2  @c Playing
        PERFORM Run-Game
    WHEN 3  @c Game Over
        PERFORM Show-Results
END-EVALUATE.
@end example

@subsection Input Handling Pattern

@example
Check-Input.
    IF Left-Pressed THEN
        SUBTRACT 1 FROM Player-X
    END-IF
    IF Right-Pressed THEN
        ADD 1 TO Player-X
    END-IF
    IF Jump-Pressed AND On-Ground THEN
        MOVE 'Y' TO Is-Jumping
    END-IF
    GOBACK.
@end example

@section Best Practices

As you write more EIGHTBOL, follow these guidelines:

@enumerate
@item Use descriptive variable names (Player-Health, not PH)
@item Add comments explaining complex logic
@item Break large procedures into smaller ones
@item Initialize variables with VALUE clauses
@item Test procedures individually before combining
@item Use PERFORM instead of GO TO when possible
@item Keep procedures under 50 lines when practical
@end enumerate

@node CPU Backends
@chapter CPU Backends

@cindex CPU backends
@cindex target processors
@cindex assembly generation
@cindex ABI
@cindex calling convention

EIGHTBOL generates optimized assembly code for multiple CPU architectures.
Each backend documents its ABI (Application Binary Interface): register usage,
calling conventions, and procedure entry/exit. Hand-written assembly that
calls or is called by EIGHTBOL-generated code must follow these conventions.

@section 6502 Backend

@cindex 6502
@cindex MOS 6502

The 6502 backend generates code for the MOS 6502 processor family (6502, 65c02,
65c816, HuC6280, RP2A03). Output uses 64tass assembler syntax.

@subsection Registers
@table @code
@item A
Accumulator; holds byte results and operands
@item X
X index register; used for indexing
@item Y
Y index register; used for slot offsets (ldy #Slot, lda (Self),y)
@end table

@subsection ABI and Calling Conventions
@table @asis
@item Procedure call (PERFORM / CALL)
@code{jsr} to procedure label. Caller and callee share same bank.
Near @code{CALL} to a local label uses @code{jsr}; a tail @code{CALL} immediately before
@code{GOBACK}/@code{EXIT@dots{}} may use @code{jmp}.  Service, library, and bank-switched
forms use @code{.FarCall}, @code{.FarJSR}, or @code{jsr Lib.@dots{}} as appropriate.
@item Return
@code{rts}. No return value in registers.
@item INVOKE Self @code{"Method"}
@code{.CallMethod Call@var{Class}@var{Method}, @var{Class}Class} --- same Phantasia
@code{CallMethod} macro as @code{INVOKE} on a typed object (dispatches via @code{DoCallMethod}).
@item INVOKE variable @code{"Method"}
@code{.CallMethod Call@var{Type}@var{Method}, @var{Type}Class, @var{Var}}
@item Slot access
@code{ldy #@var{OriginClass}@var{Slot}; lda (Self),y} for slot OF Self
@item Caller-saved
A, X, Y may be clobbered by any call
@end table

@subsection Memory Access
6502 uses zero-page and absolute addressing. Variables map to direct addresses.

@section Z80 Backend

@cindex Z80
@cindex Zilog Z80

Z80 code generation. Output: lowercase Z80 assembly (ld a,(hl), etc.)

@subsection Registers
@table @code
@item A
Accumulator (8-bit); byte results
@item HL
16-bit accumulator; word results, pointer for slot/array access
@item BC
Count register; loop counters, array indexing
@item DE
Destination pointer; block copy dest, temp for slot math
@item B
Temp for comparisons and bit ops
@end table

@subsection ABI and Calling Conventions
@table @asis
@item Procedure call
@code{call @var{label}}. Return with @code{ret}.
@item Return value
Byte: in A. Word: in HL.
@item INVOKE Self
@code{call Invoke@var{Class}@var{Method}}
@item INVOKE variable
@code{call Call@var{Type}@var{Method}}
@item Caller-saved
A, HL, BC, DE, B may be clobbered. IX, IY not used by backend.
@end table

@section SM83 Backend (Game Boy)

@cindex SM83
@cindex Game Boy

SM83 (Sharp) is the Game Boy CPU, Z80/8080-like. Output: RGBDS syntax.

@subsection Registers
Same allocation as Z80: A=accumulator, HL=ptr, BC=count, DE=dest-ptr.

@subsection ABI and Calling Conventions
@code{call} / @code{ret}. Byte return in A, word in HL. Same INVOKE
conventions as Z80.

@section CP1610 Backend (Intellivision)

@cindex CP1610
@cindex Intellivision

General Instrument CP1610, 16-bit RISC. Output: as1600 assembler syntax.

@subsection Registers
@table @code
@item R0
Accumulator; 8-bit values use low byte
@item R1-R4
General purpose
@item R5
Return address for @code{JSR R5,addr}; @code{JR R5} returns
@item R6
Stack pointer
@item R7
Program counter
@end table

@subsection ABI and Calling Conventions
@table @asis
@item Procedure call
@code{JSR R5, @var{label}}. Return address in R5; callee returns with @code{JR R5}.
@item Return value
In R0 (byte or word)
@item Caller-saved
R0-R4 may be clobbered. R5, R6 must be preserved.
@end table

@section M68K Backend (68000)

@cindex M68K
@cindex Motorola 68000

Motorola 68000. Output: GAS/AT&T syntax (move.b, move.w).

@subsection Registers
@table @code
@item D0
Accumulator; byte/word results
@item D1
Temp for expressions
@item A0
Address temp, slot/array base
@item A7
Stack pointer
@end table

@subsection ABI and Calling Conventions
@table @asis
@item Procedure call
@code{jsr @var{label}}. Return with @code{rts}.
@item Return value
Byte/word in D0
@item Caller-saved
D0, D1, A0 may be clobbered. A1-A6, D2-D7 callee-saved if used.
@end table

@section i286 Backend (Intel 80286)

@cindex i286
@cindex 80286
@cindex Intel

Intel 80286, 16-bit. Output: Intel syntax (.286, .model small).

@subsection Registers
@table @code
@item AL/AX
Accumulator; AL for byte, AX for word
@item BL/BX
Temp; byte or word
@item CX
Temp for bit ops, loop count (STRING)
@item SI
Index for array/subscript access
@item DI
Destination pointer for block copy
@end table

@subsection ABI and Calling Conventions
@table @asis
@item Procedure call
@code{call @var{label}}. Return with @code{ret}.
@item Return value
Byte in AL, word in AX
@item INVOKE
@code{call Invoke@var{Class}@var{Method}} or @code{call Call@var{Type}@var{Method}}
@item Caller-saved
AX, BX, CX, SI, DI may be clobbered. BP, SP preserved.
@end table

@section ARM7 Backend (ARM7TDMI)

@cindex ARM7
@cindex ARM7TDMI

ARM7TDMI. Output: Thumb-mode GAS assembly.

@subsection Registers
@table @code
@item R0
Accumulator; byte/word results
@item R1
Temp, dest pointer
@item R2
Source pointer, temp
@item R13 (SP)
Stack pointer
@item R14 (LR)
Link register; @code{bx lr} returns
@end table

@subsection ABI and Calling Conventions
@table @asis
@item Procedure call
@code{bl @var{label}}. Return with @code{bx lr}.
@item Return value
In R0
@item Caller-saved
R0, R1, R2 may be clobbered. R4-R11 callee-saved.
@end table

@node Examples
@chapter Examples

@cindex examples
@cindex sample programs

Let's learn by doing! This chapter provides complete, working examples
you can compile and run. Start with simple programs and build up to
more complex ones.

@section Your First Object: Game Manager

@example
IDENTIFICATION DIVISION.
CLASS-ID. GameManager.

OBJECT.
    PROCEDURE DIVISION.

        METHOD-ID. "ShowWelcome".
            PROCEDURE DIVISION.
            MOVE "Welcome to EIGHTBOL Gaming!" TO Message.
            MOVE "Ready Player One..." TO Subtitle.
            EXIT METHOD.
        END METHOD "ShowWelcome".
END OBJECT.

END CLASS GameManager.
@end example

@strong{Try This:} Create a GameManager object and call its ShowWelcome method.

@section Simple Calculator Object

Let's create a calculator object that performs basic math:

@example
IDENTIFICATION DIVISION.
CLASS-ID. Calculator.

OBJECT.
    DATA DIVISION.
        COPY CalculatorData.

    PROCEDURE DIVISION.

        METHOD-ID. "Add".
            PROCEDURE DIVISION.
            ADD Number-A TO Number-B GIVING Result.
            GOBACK GIVING Result.
        END METHOD "Add".

        METHOD-ID. "Subtract".
            PROCEDURE DIVISION.
            SUBTRACT Number-B FROM Number-A GIVING Result.
            GOBACK GIVING Result.
        END METHOD "Subtract".

        METHOD-ID. "Multiply".
            PROCEDURE DIVISION.
            MULTIPLY Number-A BY Number-B GIVING Result.
            GOBACK GIVING Result.
        END METHOD "Multiply".
END OBJECT.

END CLASS Calculator.
@end example

@strong{Modify It:} Add a division method and change the numbers.

@section Simple Game Character

Let's create a character that can take damage:

@example
IDENTIFICATION DIVISION.
CLASS-ID. Game-Character INHERITS Basic-Object.

OBJECT.
    DATA DIVISION.
    COPY CharacterInstanceData.

    PROCEDURE DIVISION.

        METHOD-ID. "Take-Damage".
        DATA DIVISION.
        LINKAGE SECTION.
        01 Damage-Amount PIC 9(3).
        PROCEDURE DIVISION USING BY VALUE Damage-Amount.
            SUBTRACT Damage-Amount FROM Health-Points
            IF Health-Points < 1 THEN
                INVOKE SELF "Die"
            ELSE
                MOVE 1 TO Damage-Taken-Flag
            END-IF
            EXIT METHOD.
        END METHOD "Take-Damage".

        METHOD-ID. "Heal".
        DATA DIVISION.
        LINKAGE SECTION.
        01 Heal-Amount PIC 9(3).
        PROCEDURE DIVISION USING BY VALUE Heal-Amount.
            ADD Heal-Amount TO Health-Points
            IF Health-Points > Max-Health THEN
                MOVE Max-Health TO Health-Points
            END-IF
            MOVE 1 TO Healed-Flag
            EXIT METHOD.
        END METHOD "Heal".

        METHOD-ID. "Die".
        PROCEDURE DIVISION.
            MOVE 1 TO Dead-Flag
            LOG FAULT "DEAD"
            EXIT METHOD.
        END METHOD "Die".
END OBJECT.

END CLASS Game-Character.
@end example

@section Complete Game: Number Guessing

Here's a complete, playable game:

@example
IDENTIFICATION DIVISION.
CLASS-ID. Number-Guessing-Game.

OBJECT.
    DATA DIVISION.
        COPY GuessingGameData.

    PROCEDURE DIVISION.

        METHOD-ID. "Initialize".
            PROCEDURE DIVISION.
            COMPUTE Secret-Number = RANDOM.
            MOVE 0 TO Guess-Count.
            MOVE 'N' TO Game-Over.
            EXIT METHOD.
        END METHOD "Initialize".

        METHOD-ID. "MakeGuess".
            PROCEDURE DIVISION USING Guess-Value.
            MOVE Guess-Value TO Player-Guess.
            ADD 1 TO Guess-Count.

            IF Player-Guess = Secret-Number THEN
                MOVE 3 TO Guess-Result  @c Correct!
                MOVE 'Y' TO Game-Over
            ELSE
                IF Player-Guess < Secret-Number THEN
                    MOVE 1 TO Guess-Result  @c Too low
                ELSE
                    MOVE 2 TO Guess-Result  @c Too high
                END-IF
            END-IF.
            EXIT METHOD.
        END METHOD "MakeGuess".

        METHOD-ID. "GetResult".
            PROCEDURE DIVISION.
            GOBACK GIVING Guess-Result.
        END METHOD "GetResult".

        METHOD-ID. "IsGameOver".
            PROCEDURE DIVISION.
            IF Game-Over = 'Y' THEN
                GOBACK GIVING 1
            ELSE
                GOBACK GIVING 0
            END-IF.
        END METHOD "IsGameOver".
END OBJECT.

END CLASS Number-Guessing-Game.
@end example

@section Tips for Writing Your Own Objects

As you write more EIGHTBOL programs, here are some helpful tips:

@enumerate
@item Start simple - get one feature working at a time
@item Test methods individually before combining them
@item Keep methods short and focused on one task
@item Use meaningful variable and method names
@item Use COPY statements for data definitions
@item Comment complex logic
@item Use return values to communicate results
@item Experiment with different approaches
@end enumerate

@strong{Remember:} Every expert programmer started as a beginner. The key
is to practice regularly and learn from each program you write!

@node Troubleshooting
@chapter Troubleshooting

@cindex troubleshooting
@cindex errors
@cindex debugging

Common issues and their solutions.

@section Compilation Errors

@subsection Undefined Variable
@code{MOVE 1 TO UndefinedVar} generates an error because the variable
isn't declared in DATA DIVISION.

@strong{Solution:} Declare all variables in WORKING-STORAGE SECTION.

@subsection Invalid PIC Clause
String variables (PIC X) are not supported.

@strong{Solution:} Use byte arrays or numeric variables instead.

@section Runtime Issues

@subsection Stack Overflow
Deep recursion can cause stack overflow on 8-bit systems.

@strong{Solution:} Use iteration instead of recursion where possible.

@subsection Memory Limits
8-bit systems have limited RAM.

@strong{Solution:} Minimize variable usage and optimize data structures.

@section Platform-Specific Issues

@subsection 6502 Zero Page
6502 code uses zero-page addressing for efficiency.

@subsection Z80 Memory Banking
Z80 systems may require bank switching for large programs.

@node Index
@chapter Index

@cindex index

@printindex cp

@bye
